What does ohana mean?
Family.
Ohana means family.
Maybe you would be better off in new york.
You could get around easier.
Is my culiana.
This is our ohana's land.
Not like you.
I'm going to die before I leave.
I think.
Kuliana, to me, is deeper than just what
we translate it as,
which is responsibility.
As hawaiians, we know that
it's so much more than that.
It's not only a responsibility,
but a privilege.
We have kuliana.
Our culiana here is to our
aina to protect our land.
Kuliana to our ohana.
And our community is
uplifted and doing well.
It's spiritual,
and it manifests physically, emotionally,
socially, and it's all
encompassing, really.
I love the ocean in general.
Coming from an island
nation, the ocean is our aina and where we
get our food and how we meet our cousins
and other places, it's
that which connects us.
I spent my life being
a competitive surfer.
I never really wanted my children to be
professional athletes in surfing, but
I did want them to be ocean people.
One of my favorite boards has a pin tail
so good for, like, barrels and stuff.
When there's a set coming and we don't
want everyone to know, I'll just
yell ibaho, which means outside.
And then all three of us
will start paddling out.
Everybody's like, oh, what's going on?
It's weird because a lot of people don't
think about surfing as
a cultural practice.
It's actually been a cultural practice way
longer than it's been a sport, really.
The ocean is our source of happiness
and grounding, and a lot of this.
Is that we have
the next generation of ocean stewards are
going to be these keiki that have
confidence within themselves, and because
of that self confidence and that MAS, will
also recognize their
responsibility to the ocean.
Food is such a vehicle for conveying your
feelings, conveying your
aloha for somebody.
What do you guys love about cooking?
Taste testing.
The best food to me, is the food that
makes you want to eat it with others.
Yeah.
Because really, no matter how good your
stew is, if it doesn't remind you of
something comforting or home,
it's not really that good.
Right.
You're not just hitting
something with a stone.
You're connecting yourself back to your
ancestors, to your kupuna, to the families
before you, to your ohana,
connecting to your very existence.
I wasn't fortunate enough to grow up
seeing my ancestors kui, but
I'm just really happy that I have that
ability to have my
children grow up, see me.
Kui almost magical.
Yeah.
The way that their hands move and
the way the stone hits the food.
I'm not sure if they totally understand at
this point in life, but I hope that as
they become adults
themselves, they understand.
I have a couliana.
I have a sense of responsibility
to represent it properly.
We always feel the need to feed people.
What is that?
Hawaiian.
Oleo really?
Is the language of this place.
That deep connection from our land, from
our stories, from our songs, from our
chant, from our hula noka
nayakila K-E-A kuala nayakila.
In many ways, our oleo was under attack,
was almost completely obliterated.
Three of my grandparents are hawaiian.
As adults, none of them spoke hawaiian.
I grew up with this komahal sadness that
olelo was something that was within our
reach but lost in my family even to today.
I would have expected there to be a bigger
community of hawaiian language speakers
than there actually is right now.
English shouldn't be the
main language of the world.
We should value the thousands of
indigenous languages around or
native languages that we have.
And we really should bring that back
because so much is lost,
so much culture is lost.
When we lose the language.
It needs to be a treasure that we
take care of and we help to grow.